[THEME MUSIC]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
Have you ever been
with a loved one
and felt your heart open up
with a rush of warmth and joy?
Most of us have had that
kind of beautiful experience
at some point in our lives.
And doesn't it seem like the
heart has its own intelligence
in those moments?
In our modern age,
scientists have
searched for the seat
of consciousness,
primarily by examining the
functions of the brain.
But is consciousness contained
only within our brain?
Many ancient traditions
thought of the heart
as the primary seat
of consciousness,
the key to accessing
our inner wisdom.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In many ancient cultures,
the heart was more primary.
It was viewed as the
seat of the soul.
The brain was viewed more like
a circuit board or processor.
And it didn't receive the
same amount of attention
that we give it today.
In some Eastern
cultures, there hasn't
been that same distinction
that we see in the West.
Heart and mind
are more the same.
And when saying, I
think, some cultures
point to their heart
rather than their head.
Now, our Western civilization
has moved so far away
from our true self.
And part of our journey is
to come back to our center,
to once again
connect to our heart
as our center rather
than our brain.
We need to live from
the heart to think, act,
and speak from the heart.
Now, fortunately, we
live in exciting times
when science is beginning
to reveal evidence
that supports what ancient
wisdom teachings have
known all along.
Let's take a look at this
fascinating body of research
that is reorienting us
back toward the heart
as a key player in
the mind-body system.
Our journey to the heart
takes us deeper into the body,
into the center of our being.
No longer do we think of
the heart as just a muscle
that pumps blood
through our system.
Now, we're learning
the heart is more
similar to the brain than
any other organ in the body.
Scientists discovered
in the '80s
that the heart is made of a
huge number of glial cells
and neurons much like the brain.
In fact, some scientists
think that it may even
function semi-independently
as its own neural network.
This has led some researchers
in the growing field
of neurocardiology to
propose the heart functions
as another brain center.
And the heart's neural
circuitry gives it
the ability to
act independently,
to make decisions, and
to even feel and sense.
So what is the role of this
heart-brain connection?
We find clues to how the
heart and brain communicate
through fascinating new
research on the vagus nerve.
Let's look more closely
at this important nerve.
The vagus nerve runs from the
top of the spinal cord down
to all of the major organs.
And it's responsible for the
warm and expansive feelings
within our chest when we
feel moved by something.
It relates to our feelings of
altruism, romance, love, joy,
and other feel-good
qualities of the heart.
The magic ingredient involved
in all of these warm feelings
is a neuropeptide
called oxytocin.
Oxytocin is called
the love chemical
because our bodies produce
it in higher quantities when
we're falling in love or
bonding with each other.
Oxytocin is produced both by the
hypothalamus gland in the brain
as well as by the heart itself.
And the vagus nerve has an
abundance of receptor sites
that oxytocin unlocks.
Have you ever known
someone who tends
to be a really
big-hearted person, who
seems to have a lot of
compassion, gratitude, love,
and joy to share with others?
It's likely that
they are someone
who generally has a
high level of activity
in their vagus nerve.
And children who are more
cooperative and likely to share
have also been found to have
more vagus nerve activity.
What else does the
vagus nerve do?
Well, we've all heard of how
meditation and mindfulness
activities reduce stress
and improve our health.
Research on the vagus nerve
has revealed a key piece
of how and why this happens.
It turns out that
the vagus nerve
is the primary nerve controlling
our parasympathetic nervous
system.
As we stimulate the vagus
nerve, our heart rate slows down
and our relaxation
response kicks in.
This stimulation produces
a neurotransmitter
called acetylcholine, which
reduces inflammation and helps
to activate our muscles.
Now, why is this so important?
Stress amplifies inflammation.
And inflammation accelerates
the breakdown of cells,
the onset of disease,
and the aging process.
This is why when we're
chronically stressed
we age more quickly
and get sick.
By stimulating the
vagus nerve, we
can reduce the
effects of stress.
So how do we stimulate
the vagus nerve?
Through simple practices
like meditation,
qigong, chanting or humming,
slow, deep breathing
into the belly, as well as long
hugs and positive connections
with other people.
This is why many
of these practices
are promoted for anti-aging
and to reduce stress
and inflammation
in the body as well
as to boost our immune system.
Our bodies truly
have the potential
to heal and repair themselves
beyond what we can imagine.
And the vagus nerve is
one of the key players
in this process.
Now, how does this fit in with
the heart-and-brain connection?
The brain and the heart
communicate primarily
through the vagus nerve.
And for a long time,
biologists thought of the brain
as the command center that
directs the rest of the body,
including the heart.
But it turns out that
the flow of communication
isn't just one way.
Groundbreaking research
by the HeartMath Institute
has shown the heart actually
sends more information
to the brain than
the other way around.
And the heart actually
responds to emotional stimuli
before the brain does.
Even more mind-blowing is that
the heart registers a response
up to six seconds before
the stimulus is even
presented to us.
Now, what does this mean?
Well, for one, it shows
that the heart intuitively
knows what's coming just
before it appears, especially
when that stimulus might
trigger an emotional response
within us.
Now, this puts a whole new
context on the old saying,
listen to your heart.
The other thing we
can draw from this
is that the heart may be the
primary driver of the brain
and not the other way around.
Now, of course, spiritual
wisdom has taught this
throughout the ages.
Again and again, the
teachings encourage
us to shift out of the head
and connect into the heart.
We're guided to listen
within and receive
the wisdom of the heart
rather than grasping
at it from the mind.
Why is this so important?
We've seen, through our
exploration of the brain,
how our thought processes are
influenced by our subconscious
programming.
Our mind is polluted by
indoctrination, past behavior
patterns, developmental
programming,
and unhealed traumas.
And this results in faulty
wiring that can lead us away
from our true reality.
The heart, on the other hand,
connects us to our true self.
It's our connection to the
signals coming from the deeper
aspects of who we are,
including our higher
self and our inner child.
When we're trying to develop
ourselves on a spiritual path
and we're coming into greater
connection to who we are,
connecting with the
heart is crucial.
We can't do it from the mind.
If we are to become
more of our higher self
and achieve our full
potential, then we
must open this channel
of communication.
We must connect to
the heart, access
this deep well of love,
compassion, forgiveness
so that we can heal.
Too many people unfortunately
have closed down their heart
chakras because of emotional
wounding around love, romance,
and not feeling good
enough or wanted.
But if we can come to
love and accept ourselves
regardless of how
others feel about us,
then we can heal
from those wounds
and keep our hearts open.
Only when our hearts are open
can we give and receive more
love in our lives.
And we need to open our hearts
again so that they can function
at full capacity
to keep us healthy
and living a life of joy.
Remember, our heart
is not just a pump.
It's a center of wisdom and
connection to true self.
So what do we know about
the heart as a brain center?
And what signals is it
sending to the brain?
To begin with, the vagus nerve
is a closed circuit loop.
It runs from the brain to the
heart and then from the heart
back to the brain.
And this allows the heart
to definitely influence
the brain's action.
Even more fascinating
is the new evidence
that the heart
sends more signals
to the brain than
the other way around.
This is at least
true when it comes
to emotional and
intuitive content.
Plus, with the heart
producing its own peptides,
neurotransmitters, and
hormones, it has a direct effect
on the emotional responses
of our limbic system
as well as on our ability to
think with the upper cortex
areas.
And these hormones also
influence the endocrine system,
which is connected
to our chakras that
interact with our biofield.
And we can take this even
further because the heart has
a really strong
electromagnetic field that
connects to our aura.
Studies by the HeartMath
Institute have shown that
the heart's magnetic field
is 60 times stronger than
the brain's.
And it extends several
feet out from the body
in every direction.
Every cell of our body
is also influenced
by this magnetic
field of the heart.
The more we look at the
heart, the more evidence
we find that it's actually the
primary driver for the brain
and our entire energy field.
Another remarkable
aspect of the heart
is its rhythm or heartbeat.
This rhythm is
self-generated, meaning
it doesn't rely on the brain.
The electrical impulses
that establish and control
this rhythm arise spontaneously
from within the cardiac cells
themselves.
Equally intriguing is
that, after just a few days
of the heart beginning to
beat, the inner ear also
begins to form in the embryo.
And during these early
stages of development
the early brain
becomes entrained
into the heart's rhythm.
In addition to
our own heartbeat,
our mother's heartbeat is
the first resonance system
that we are exposed to.
As our own heartbeat
self-generates,
it first entrains into
the mother's heartbeat.
A mother's heart beats at a
rate of about 75 to 80 beats
per minute, which
equals about 1.25 hertz,
or beats per second.
The fetus's heartbeat increases
from there up to 185 beats
per minute, or about 3 hertz.
So the heartbeat
of the fetus spans
the range of 1 to 3 hertz.
This is the range that
coincides with delta brainwave
frequencies.
And as the brain
starts to form, its
synchronizes into
this delta rhythm.
It's not a conscious state--
more like a deep trance.
And in this state,
though, we are
connected to the oneness of
the vibrations coming in.
So what does this tell us?
Well, the heart is primary.
And the brain
development depends
on this beating of the heart.
Both the fetus's and
the mother's heart
become the critical drivers for
synchronization and coherence.
The heart entrains the
brain through the heartbeat.
And this is why it can
be so powerful to tune
in and listen to the
beating of your own heart.
What does this mean
for us here and now?
Well, on this journey to
accessing our full potential,
we need to shift from
being head-centered
to heart-centered.
We want to let our heart
lead and conduct our flow.
And some ways to
start doing this
are to tune into the rhythm
of the heart, feel the pulse,
tune into its beat, and
synchronize your breath
with the heartbeat.
The breath will be
slower at a lower octave
but in harmony
with the heartbeat.
The more we bring our attention
to the rhythm of the heart,
the more our brain also starts
to train into that rhythm.
This will drop us into
a transcendent state
of consciousness at the delta
brainwave frequency level.
And in such a state, our
sense of self disappears.
And we come into a more
pure state of awareness.
We transition from
our egoic self
to pure awareness of being.
And this becomes a bridge,
moving our awareness
beyond the body and coming
into a sense of expansiveness.
But how do we really know if
we are getting our brainwaves
into sync with our heart?
Well, today, we have
biofeedback methods
that can assist us
with training ourselves
into this coherent state.
The HeartMath
Institute has studied
this brain-heart
coherence for many years
from the physiological,
emotional,
and psychospiritual
perspectives.
And by monitoring heart-rate
variability, respiratory rate,
and brainwave signals, something
remarkable was revealed.
When a person successfully
entrains their heart,
their breath, and their
brainwaves, there is a strong,
0.1-hertz signal found traveling
throughout that heart-brain
circuit of the vagus nerve.
Why is this so remarkable?
Because if it was
just the heartbeat
influencing the system,
then the signals
would be more in the range of
1 to about 1 and 1/2 hertz.
So this 0.1-hertz signal is
pointing to something else.
It points to a coherence of
several oscillating systems all
interacting together to create
this 0.1-hertz variability
signal and something new that
emerges from the interactions
of several different parts.
And this signal actually
runs through the nerves
and the sensory
receptors themselves
connecting all of these
systems, bringing a higher
level of order and coherence.
However, not all of the brain
can entrain into this narrow
range of 0.1-hertz.
So in order to achieve a
total coherence of our system,
we need a broader
frequency range.
And how do we achieve that?
It all comes down to a
certain kind of attitude--
that is, to have an attitude
of gratitude and compassion.
Focusing on what we're grateful
for and being compassionate
influences our system
in powerful ways.
This really is about what
we choose to focus on.
It's about our
attitude towards life.
Are we in gratitude and focused
on what we're thankful for?
Or are we focusing on
what's not to our liking
and then complaining about it?
Complaining create
stress in our system
while gratitude brings us into
greater balance, coherence,
and health.
Which would you rather have?
But this also goes
way beyond just how
we feel because
our attitude also
influences our quantum reality.
We need to reach that
state of coherence
in order to have an influence
on the quantum field.
Without it, we won't
have any impact.
Our energies would be more
constantly fluctuating, almost
like an interrupted radio
signal full of static,
and then sending out a
chaotic stream of energy.
That's not going to
influence the quantum field.
But when we come into
a coherent state,
it's as if our whole system
is working together as one.
Now, we can make impact.
In the law of attraction
and setting of intentions,
these things only work if
we're in a coherent state.
If we can't hold our
focus long enough,
it's hard to access
the quantum field.
Our attention needs
to be laser-focused.
And this is why
meditation is so key.
With meditation, we
can train ourselves
to maintain a coherent
state and impact the field.
And while meditation helps us
sustain our coherent state,
attitude is a major factor in
getting us into that coherence.
Focusing on gratitude,
compassion, love--
these things will help us
bring our full attention
into the heart and into
these energies to get us
into that coherent state.
This is something
that is self-induced.
It doesn't require anything
from outside of us.
It's a choice we make
to create this within.
So how do we achieve
such a state?
The key is that we need
to be it to attract it.
At the spiritual level,
the rule of thumb
is, like attracts like.
So we want to attune to
love, compassion, empathy,
and romance--
not from drama, but from a state
of being that is within us.
And it begins from us loving
ourselves, being compassionate
towards ourselves, and
living a romantic life,
meaning a sensory-rich life.
Because that is what makes
us feel more fully alive.
Then, the hermetic principle
of correspondence kicks in--
as above, so below; as
the inner, so the outer.
And we attract more of
the same into our lives.
As we come into
this coherent state,
we shift our awareness
from the brain down
to the heart consciousness.
And the feelings of gratitude,
love, and compassion
continue to deepen
and expand within us.
This becomes the bridge
to transcendent states
where we achieve full
spectrum synchronization
of our brain, heart, and body.
Now, what happens when we come
into this fully synchronized
state?
Studies with experienced
Tibetan monks
reveal some fascinating answers.
Scientists monitored the
brainwaves of the monks
during a deep
meditation process.
As they went into
their meditation,
their brainwaves shifted
from beta to alpha to theta
and, finally, into
delta as expected.
As the monks reached
that deep state of delta,
they report tapping
into a sense of oneness
with the universal
consciousness.
It is here that they
began to then focus
on gratitude and compassion,
bringing their whole being
into this state.
Then, their focus moved
towards sending this compassion
and gratitude out into the world
for the benefit of all beings.
The remarkable discovery
was that, as they
start to send this
energy out, it
triggers gamma waves from the
deep parts of the brain up.
And as gamma sweeps through the
whole brain and harmonizes it,
this then brings them into
a full-spectrum entrainment
spanning from delta to gamma.
Even more remarkable is that
the gamma signals observed
in these monks were the largest
ever seen in any humans.
And during waking
consciousness, they still
hold that vibration of
compassion and gratitude.
When we're in the presence
of one of these monks,
we can often sense that
reverence, that peace,
holiness, that beauty, and
the compassion in their field.
This is something we can all
cultivate through a dedicated
meditation practice.
And when we access
this peak state,
we're connected to
universal consciousness.
And we tune into pure joy,
compassion, and wisdom.
It's an enlightened
state of being.
Speaking of enlightenment,
what is it anyhow?
Many people think
that enlightenment
is a destination, an end goal.
But in truth, it's a beginning.
It's an awakening to these
higher states of consciousness
and starting to experience
new states of being
that expand our perspective.
When we reach this
awakening, we begin
to truly step onto
the path to attaining
our own spiritual mastery.
Enlightened people don't
always feel bliss, joy,
and compassion.
Enlightenment doesn't take
people's problems away.
Usually, when we awaken
to enlightenment,
we actually feel
everything more deeply.
We become truly in touch
with our soul and spirit.
And in this great
empathy, we may even
feel more pain, the pain of the
world that we're connected to.
Achieving true mastery of the
heart moves us towards this.
It's a gateway to this
enlightenment type of state
to live with greater compassion,
empathy, devotion, and desire
to serve.
How do we hold these energies
of compassion and love
within our energy field?
What's happening in
our biofield that
supports the transfer of
this energy to others?
To answer this, let's
take a quick look
at the heart's influence
on the biofield.
When the heart
beats, it generates
an electromagnetic field with
the strength of 2 and 1/2 watts
of energy in every pulse.
We can measure this field
up to at least 3 feet,
or 1 meter from the body.
But aura carries this
energy even further
reaching out to as far
as 50 feet from the body.
If we look at our
aura as a torus,
the heart is at the center.
And it pumps energies
through our field.
And this pumping amplifies
the electromagnetic effect.
As it pumps, that energy moves
through the toroidal flow.
And in the heart's center
is a spiraling vortex.
The brain emits a field too.
But it's much smaller.
And when the biofield of
the brain and the heart
are entrained together however,
the impact is much greater.
When we reach a coherent
state, that frequency
travels throughout the brain,
the body, and the aura.
And not only are we
creating coherence
in our inner structures.
We're affecting our
biofield as well.
Plus, then, when others
enter into our biofield,
they can be entrained into
the frequencies that we emit.
The greater our
state of coherence,
the stronger our resonance
is to entrain others
into that vibration.
Where does this gateway
of the heart take us?
Mystics have often talked
about that intelligence
of the heart which guides us
towards kindness, altruism,
and caring for the
well-being of all.
This intelligence is
not logical though.
It's based on compassion.
And it connects us
with the greater whole.
The heart guides us
towards kindness.
It becomes a gateway
through which we connect
to the whole of the universe.
From a quantum
perspective, there
is a vast amount of energy
stored within this frequency
spectrum.
And through the
gateway of the heart,
we can connect to the
holographic unity.
We bridge the individual
self with the greater cosmos.
We maintain our sense of self.
But it's no longer a barrier.
We don't sense any separation.
And we connect to the
whole of the universe.
What are some steps
that we can take
to open this
gateway of the heart
and cultivate more compassion,
gratitude, and love?
Whether or not we can access
these energies ultimately
rests upon our own attitudes
of ourselves and our lives.
When someone sees
themselves as a victim,
it's because they've taken on
an outlook of separateness.
It's a feeling of powerlessness
where things are outside
seem more powerful.
When we feel powerless,
we then don't
feel good enough or worthy
enough to deal with things.
But it's our sense of
self-worth, self-love,
and self-acceptance that rests
at the core of our ability
to access this
gateway of the heart.
Ultimately, this comes
down to two questions.
Can we love ourselves enough?
And can we be
grateful for our lives
even if we don't think there's
much to be grateful about?
In one study, participants
kept a gratitude journal
for six weeks.
And then three
months later, they
were given an exercise
to express gratitude.
Those who practiced the
gratitude journaling
showed significantly
more activity
in the medial
prefrontal cortex when
compared to the control group
who didn't do the journaling.
This was three months after
their gratitude journaling
had ended.
And yet the brain had
sustainably changed.
This suggests that
practicing gratitude
can help train our
brain to be more
sensitive to the experience
of gratitude long range.
It rewires our brain
and our outlook on life.
Practicing gratitude,
even if we don't feel it,
creates a shift within us to
start experiencing it more.
One way to start
working with this
is to start your own
gratitude journal
and make it a daily practice.
Just by committing to
the journaling practice,
you might start
looking for the things
to be grateful for as
you go through your day.
This then starts
shifting your perspective
on what we're
paying attention to
or focusing on
throughout the day.
When you find something
to be grateful for,
connect to the heart
in that moment.
Tune in and be fully present
with that moment of gratitude.
Even putting a hand
on her heart can
help us shift our focus
and body awareness.
Rather than feeling it for
a second and then moving on,
stay in that moment.
Be there in that moment
of time and learn
to amplify that
feeling of gratitude.
As we tune in and take time
to experience gratitude,
this also encourages
more oxytocin production.
And doing this will help us
come into a coherent state.
And as we amplify
the experience,
we prolong that state.
And this is something we
can do throughout the day
as we experienced
moments of gratitude
and again in the evening
when we journal it down.
As you do this, focus
on the heart center.
Focus on gratitude,
love, acceptance.
And also, acknowledge yourself.
This is about loving yourself
and accepting yourself.
Now, there are three areas to
focus on with this practice.
The first is to
include five things
that you're grateful for today.
These can be things that you're
grateful for in your life
in general or things you
experienced this day.
The second is to acknowledge
five things about yourself
and what you've accomplished.
If you've handled a stressful
situation with equanimity
or did something to be
proud of, acknowledge it.
This is about shifting to focus
on gratitude and love of self
rather than on all the
ways that we cut ourselves
down and criticize.
Let's affirm what we did well.
The third area to
journal about is
to acknowledge five things to
be grateful for in the world
or the universe or with our
connection to divine source,
something that is beyond us.
For example, we can
acknowledge our gratitude
towards the majesty
of eternal spirit
or towards the
beauty of the world.
Acknowledge the opportunities
and the freedoms
that we have to explore these
things in today's world.
Find things at a
philosophical level
that we can be grateful
for and connect
to the unity of all things.
And when you find
yourself moving out
of coherence or start
feeling stressed,
you can also practice
controlled breathing.
The breath is one
of the fastest ways
to influence our nervous system.
Focus on the breath as it
comes in through the nose,
travels down the throat, and
then bring it down to the heart
and even to the belly.
We want to really
slow down our breath
to five to seven
breaths per minute
in order to stimulate
that vagus nerve.
We can achieve this by
breathing into a count of five,
hold the breath for
a count of five,
and then exhale
to a count of 10.
Breathing out through
the mouth helps
to release more of the stress.
As you breathe,
bring your attention
to drawing that breath down into
the heart and into the belly.
Imagine the breath
drawing in energy
to activate the vagus nerve
traveling from the low brain
to all of the organs
and the heart.
Close your eyes and pull this
breath in through the nose
as it goes down.
It goes through the lower
regions of the brain
into the spinal column.
And this activates the
vagus nerve and the heart.
Join me again as we take our
final step on this journey
into the deepest
parts of our being
that connect us with the
universal consciousness.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of our human potential with
me in this episode of "Mystery
Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]